hey there today I invite you to a truly
unusual race we're going to check what
will reach the brain faster a sound wave
an odor molecule or light say hello to
my friend Emma she agreed to help us
carry out this experiment our first
contestant is a beam of light that gets
reflected off Emma's coffee cup and whoa
that was fast the light hits Emma's eye
and passes through something wet ah
that's a thin layer of tears that covers
the cornea the surface part of the eye
the cornea is an incredible thing it's
the only body part that has no blood
supply it gets oxygen right from the air
after the gas dissolves in tears but
let's not linger here otherwise we'll
lag behind the cornea is like a clear
transparent window it focuses the light
and lets it inside the eye but what's
that instead of entering the pupil our
beam has to go through one more a bit
thicker layer of moisture oh I see
that's what's called the aqueous humor
no not that kind of humor it's the
liquid that fills the space between the
cornea and eyelids it helps the cornea
keep its shape it doesn't take the light
long to get through this obstacle and
it's about to enter the pupil a dark
circle in the middle of Emma's light
brown iris the pupil can change its
colour to control the amount of light
that's going deeper into the eye right
now the pupil is squeezing and it's
happening too fast
who our light beam is quick enough to
dart through the pupil and then
immediately through a transparent lens
it works pretty much like a camera lens
flattening to let Emma see faraway
objects and thickening when she needs to
look at something nearby right after the
light beam enters the centre of the eye
it plunges into another pool of moisture
its vitreous humor Oh still not humorous
okay this colourless liquid fills the
space between the lens and the retina
thanks to it the eye can keep its
spherical shape
the light squeezes through this last
obstacle and reaches its final
destination the retina it's the inner
lining at the back of the eye
it works like a movie screen with the
light gettin projected on its surface
oops our light beam is suddenly flipped
180 degrees all because the picture is
projected on to the retina upside down
the retina is packed with
light-sensitive photoreceptors millions
of them right now they're converting our
beam of light into an electrochemical
signal at a dizzying speed it's moving
via the optic nerve toward the vision
center here near the back of the brain
tada
the brain instantly translates the
former leg beam into the image and Emma
sees her coffee cup wow that was fast
but before we draw any conclusions or
call the winner there are two more
contestants to see Emma's cat meows in
the kitchen at first it's nothing but a
sound wave it enters Emma's outer ear
and gets into a rather narrow passage
the ear canal hey watch out not so fast
oh it was the eardrum it's almost
transparent and looks like a tiny
stretched piece of plastic no wonder our
sound wave didn't notice and crashed
into it oh look the eardrum vibrates and
sensed the sound wave in the form of
vibration deeper into the middle ear
here it has to go through three teeny
bones they make our sound wave turn
vibrations stronger just in time it
encounters the first serious obstacle on
its way
it's the cochlea not a diet cochlea no
it's the real thing
situated in the inner ear it looks like
a snail and is filled with fluid diet
cochlea it's also covered with thousands
of tiny hair cells and they tickle our
vibration stay strong little buddy
anyway as the vibration dives into the
snail
it makes the fluid ripple hair cells
feel the travelling wave and analyze it
hair cells that are closer to the wide
end of the snail catch more high-pitched
sounds like a mosquito buzzing and those
closer to the center
techno or pitch sounds like a large dog
barking oh all of a sudden the hair
cells turn our sound wave / vibration
into something totally different an
electrical signal it travels to the
brain through the auditory nerve poof
and the brain converts a signal into a
series of sounds they can mean only one
thing
Emma it's time to feed your cat after
Emma gives food to her cat she spots her
Cup and decides it's time for a break
she opens the jar where she keeps ground
coffee and here it is the last
participant of our race an odor molecule
it floats through the air gets inhaled
by Emma and ends up in her nose
its moist there and the molecule barely
avoids getting stuck in some gooey
substance ah that's a mucous membrane it
catches germs dust and other tiny
particles otherwise they would get
inside the lungs and irritate them like
me our nyira tating now our odor
molecule has to make its way through a
forest of thick trees those are nasal
hairs they trap bigger particles for
example pollen or dirt that's exactly
what's happening right in front of our
eyes
a big old dust particle hits several
hairs careful coffee molecule hide
somewhere and Emma sneezes all unwelcome
stuff rushes out of her nose at a
whopping 100 miles per hour and the
whole process creates around 100
thousand droplets looks like fun but
it's not yeah it's an old joke I'm
recycling here play some miracle our
molecule manages to stay inside and now
it continues its journey it passes by
much thinner and smaller trees those are
super tiny hairs called cilia you'd be
able to see them only under a microscope
the cilia wave back and forth and move
the particle filled mucus down toward
your throat kind of like crowd surfing
at a rock concert
except here neither COFF it out or
swallow it ill
but let's not lose sight of our coffee
molecule it enters a rather big compared
to our own size chamber that's the nasal
cavity and its roof is covered with a
strip of tissue the olfactory epithelium
which is harder to say if you have a
speech impediment
olfactory is a smart word that has to do
with smell this tissue has special
receptors which are super sensitive to
odor molecules the receptors are
minuscule and you have more than 10
million and almost 450 types of them Oh
our odor molecule touches one of the
receptors but wait why is there no
reaction
each odor receptor can be activated by
different odor molecules and each odor
molecule can activate several kinds of
receptors but not all of them are
perfect fits it seems our coffee
molecule needs to find another receptor
to continue the race ah the necessary
receptors found our molecule binds to it
and its mission is over now the outcome
of the competition depends on the
electrical signal it was created when
the molecule joined the receptor at
breakneck speed the signal travels along
the olfactory nerve to the olfactory
bulb and then to the part of the brain
which identifies the smell yummy Emma's
ready to have her coffee and now let's
see the results of the rings all of the
contestants were lightning fast they
reached the brain way faster than the
blink of an eye but the slowest of them
all was the odor molecule sorry about
that bro it took the light some
fractions of a second to complete the
race from getting to Emma's eye to being
interpreted into an image in her brain I
said it needed more humor but the
fastest to reach Emma's brain was the
sound wave it's true that sound moves
more slowly than light but sun waves
cause direct vibration of the hair cells
and they don't need to activate any kind
of receptors that's why the sound wave
is the winner yep
it was the diet cochlea after all